Posthumus, thy head, which now is growing upon
thy shoulders, shall within this hour be off;
thy mistress enforced;
thy garments cut to pieces before thy face:
and all this done, spurn her home to her father;
who may haply be a little angry
for my so rough usage;
but my mother, having power of his testiness,
shall turn all into my commendations.
Out, sword, and to a sore purpose!
Fortune, put them into my hands!
You are not well: remain here in the cell;
We'll come to you after hunting.
Brother, stay here
Are we not brothers?
So man and man should be;
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Go you to hunting; I'll abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me;
Stick to your journal course: the breach of custom
Is breach of all.
I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me; society is no comfort
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you, trust me here:
I'll rob none but myself; and let me die,
Stealing so poorly.
Brother, farewell.
I wish ye sport.
You health. So please you, sir.
These are kind creatures.
Gods, what lies I have heard!
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court:
Experience, O, thou disprovest report!
The imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
I am sick still; heart-sick.
Pisanio, I'll now taste of thy drug.
I cannot find those runagates;
That villian hath mocked me. I am faint!
What slave art thou?
Thou art a robber,
A law-breaker, a villain: yield thee, thief.
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big?
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art,
Why I should yield to thee?
Thou villain base,
Know'st me not by my clothes?
Thou art some fool;
I am loath to beat thee.
Thou injurious thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.
What's thy name?
Cloten, thou villain.
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it: were it Toad,
or Adder, Spider,
'Twould move me sooner.
To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
I am son to the queen.
I am sorry for 't; not seeming
So worthy as thy birth.
Art not afeard?
Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise:
At fools I laugh, not fear them.
Die the death:
Yield, rustic mountaineer.
What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head,
Son to the queen, after his own report;
Who call'd me traitor, mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand he'ld take us in
Displace our heads where--
thank the gods!--they grow,
And set them on Lud's-town.
We are all undone.
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose,
But that he swore to take, our lives?
The law protects not us: then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law?
What company discover you abroad?
No single soul
Can we set eye on; but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants.
then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.
Let ordinance
Come as the gods foresay it: howsoe'er,
My brother hath done well.
I had no mind
To hunt this day: the boy Fidele's sickness
Did make my way long forth.
With his own sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en
His head from him: I'll throw't into the creek
And tell the fishes he's the queen's son, Cloten:
That's all I reck.
I fear 'twill be revenged:
Would, Polydote, thou hadst not done't!
though valour becomes thee well enough.
Would I had done't
So the revenge alone pursued me!
Well, 'tis done:
We'll hunt no more to-day, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee, to our cell;
Poor sick Fidele!
I'll weringly to him: to gain his colour
I'ld let a parish of such Clotens' blood,
And praise myself for charity.
O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys!
'Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearn'd, honour untaught,
Civility not seen from other,
valour that wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been sow'd.
Where's my brother?
I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream,
In embassy to his mother: his body's hostage
For his return.
(Solemn music plays)
My ingenious instrument!
Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!
Is he at home?
He went hence even now.
What does he mean? since death of my dear'st mother
it did not speak before.
All solemn things should answer solemn accidents.
The matter?
The bird is dead
That we have made so much on.
I had rather have skipp'd
from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch,
than have seen this.
O melancholy!
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom?
find the ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
Might easiliest harbour in?
How found you him?
Stark, as you see:
Thus smiling, as some fly hid tickled slumber,
Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at;
his right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.
Where?
O' the floor;
His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept,
and put my clouted brogues from off my feet,
whose rudeness answer'd my steps too loud.
Why, he but sleeps:
If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed;
♪ Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
Nor the furious winter's rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages:
Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o' the great;
Thou art past the tyrant's stroke;
Care no more to clothe and eat;
To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this, and come to dust.
Fear no more the lightning flash,
Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
Thou hast finish'd joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers must
Consign to thee, and come to dust. ♪
No exorciser harm thee!
Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
♪ Ghost unlaid forbear thee!
Nothing ill come near thee!
Quiet consummation have;
And renowned be thy grave! ♪
Great griefs, I see, medicine the less; for Cloten
Is quite forgotten. He was a queen's son, boys;
And though he came our enemy, remember
He was paid for that: though mean and mighty, rotting
Together, have one dust, yet reverence,
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
Of place 'tween high and low.
Our foe was prince
And though you took his life, as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince.
Pray You, fetch him hither.
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax',
When neither are alive.
Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven;
which is the way?--
I thank you.--By yond bush?--
Pray, how far thither?
'Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?--
I have gone all night. 'Faith, I'll lie down and sleep.
But, soft! no bedfellow!
--O god s and goddesses!
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world;
This bloody man, the care on't.
I hope I dream;
For so I thought I was a cell-keeper,
And cook to honest creatures:
but 'tis not so;
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the brain makes of fumes:
our very eyes are sometimes like
our judgments, blind.
Good faith,
I tremble stiff with fear: but if there be
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wren's eye, fear'd gods, a part of it!
The dream's here still: even when I wake, it is
Without me, as within me; not imagined, felt.
A headless man! The garments of Posthumus!
I know the shape of's leg:
this is his hand;
His foot Mercurial; his Martial thigh;
The brawns of Hercules:
but his Jovial face
Murder in heaven?
How!' Tis gone.
Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee!
Thou, conspired with that irregulous devil, Cloten,
Hast here cut off my lord.
To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous! Damn'd Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters,--damn'd Pisanio--
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the main-top! O Posthumus! alas,
Where is thy head? where's that? Ay me!
where's that?
Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart,
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
'Tis he and Cloten: malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. O, 'tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murderous to the senses? That confirms it home:
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten's:
O! Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us: O, my lord, my lord!
Now, sir, What have you dream'd of late
of this war's purpose?
Last night the very gods show'd me a vision--
I fast and pray'd for their intelligence--thus:
I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
There vanish'd in the sunbeams: which portends--
Unless my sins abuse my divination--
Success to the Roman host.
Dream often so,
And never false.
Again; and bring me word how 'tis with her.
A fever with the absence of her son,
A madness, of which her life's in danger.
Heavens! How deeply you at once do touch me!
Imogen, The great part of my comfort, gone;
my queen upon a desperate bed,
and in a time when fearful wars point at me;
her son gone,
So needful for this present: it strikes me, past
The hope of comfort.
So please your majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast, with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen, by the senate sent.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
I am amazed with matter.
Good my liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of: come more, for more
you're ready:
The want is but to put those powers in motion
That long to move.
I thank you. Let's withdraw;
I heard no letter from my master since
I wrote him Imogen was slain: 'tis strange:
Nor hear I from my mistress who did promise
To yield me often tidings:
neither know I
What is betid to Cloten; but remain
Perplex'd in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o' the king, or I'll fall in them
All other doubts, by time let them be clear'd:
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd
Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wish'd
Thou shouldst be colour'd thus.
You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio!
Every good servant does not all commands:
No bond but to do just ones.
Gods! if you should have ta'en vengeance
on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this: so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love,
To have them fall no more: you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift.
But Imogen is your own: do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey!
I am brought hither
Among the Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my lady's kingdom: 'tis enough
That, Britain, I have kill'd thy mistress; peace!
I'll give no wound to thee.
Let's see the boy's face.
He's alive, my lord.
He'll then instruct us of this body.
Young one, inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou makest thy bloody pillow?
How came it? Who is it?
What art thou?
I am nothing: or if not,
Nothing to be were better.
I may wander
From east to occident,
Try many, all good, serve truly,
never find such another master.
'Lack, good youth!
Thou movest no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding:
Thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same:
Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well master'd, but, be sure,
No less beloved.
I'll follow, sir.
So please you entertain me.
Ay, good youth!
And rather father thee than master thee.